+++
date = "2015-04-22T15:06:50+01:00"
title = "Calum Mallory"
author = ""
image = "/images/calummallorylogo.png"
subheader = "Building an out of the ordinary portfolio"
originurl = "http://www.calummallory.co.uk"
sitelink = "www.calummallory.co.uk"

+++


Calum Mallory is an individual with some extraordinary interests, and
the skills to go with them. He describes himself as a “climber, alpinist
& mountaineer”, and he certainly lives up to all three titles! Since
2013, he has been working towards tackling his biggest challenge: Mount
Everest. We were thrilled when he asked us to help out with this
journey.

When we met Calum…
------------------

We won’t lie, we were a touch disappointed when it turned out he wanted
us to make a website, and not go on the climb with him! Chest la vie!

We first met Calum when Jamie, Tactically Creative’s developer; learnt
how to ice-climb. Calum was his instructor, and over a number of weeks
taught him how to become an ice-climbing instructor himself at Ellis
Brigham’s indoor ice wall.

When Calum mentioned he was planning on climbing Mt. Everest, and needed
some help getting together a website and promotional materials to help
raise funds for the trip, we immediately offered to help. Not only did
we have experience building websites for charity focussed expeditions
with Action Challenge, but we couldn’t resist taking on such a different
project.

Getting started…
----------------

Whilst the site had the clear purpose of promoting Calum as a climber,
and raising funds for his expedition, it was also a very personal site.
Fresh from our recent work with Jake Morrell and his band, personal
sites were definitely at the front of our minds, and we quickly started
work building a brand for Calum and his exploits.

Branding is something that we rarely do. By the time most companies
start working with us, their brand is already well established and very
little can change. As with our work with Jake Morrell, we were stepping
out of our comfort zone yet again, and testing our skills in a different
area of design.

After conducting some initial research into similar sites and campaigns,
an issue that both Calum and the team agreed on, and were concerned
with; was the *feel* of the brand. We wanted to avoid getting caught up
with the “extreme sport” angle of what Calum does. Given the nature of
his work, and his age; it would have been all too easy to punch out some
relatively generic brand and site that catered to the extreme sport
market, but did nothing to differentiate Calum from his peers. Being
quite inexperienced with brand design, we were concerned that there was
a danger that we could slide towards comfortable stereotypes, even
whilst conscious of this potential pitfall. Throughout the process, we
pledged to remain vigilant for cliches and stereotypes.

Whilst Calum is young, his personality and his attitude towards climbing
are far more mature. He’s incredibly understated and lets his climbing
do all the talking. The only thing that perforates this calm, considered
personality is his enthusiasm for climbing. It’s clear when you meet him
that climbing *is* his life. We immediately associated him with an era
of climbing when it wasn’t about all the shiny, high-tech kit and the
sponsorship deals; but was much purer, and just about the climbing.

For those familiar with outdoor brands, we felt he was more
**Patagonia**, than **Arcteryx**. With that in mind, we began basing his
brand around the old ‘Chouinard’ brand that eventually evolved into
Patagonia. We took inspiration from the colours that are now considered
‘vintage’ & ‘retro’, and set out to keep our design restrained &
purposeful, much like the industrial design of the time.

The logo
--------

A logo is a logical place to start when designing a brand, and it’s
always a thought-provoking process. The fundamentals are the same as
copy-writing. You condense everything about the company or person, into
as few visual elements as possible, whilst still communicating as much
as possible. This distillation process results in simplicity, which has
a far greater chance of being understood.

In order to engage a passer-by, a logo must not only be aesthetically
simple, but also have hidden or implied meaning and content. This often
presents itself as wit or humour, and rewards the passer-by for their
attention, and prompts them to engage further.

Whilst there are similarities between brand and website design, they are
also wildly different! It’s fair to say that logos are not our cup of
tea…

However, rather than consult a logo designer, Calum opted for us to have
a crack at it first; as he loved the enthusiasm that we had for the
project. We decided to tackle it exactly as we do with the rest of our
design: slowly and iteratively. Instead of hoping for some divine flash
of inspiration (as any creative will tell you, they are rare and not to
be relied upon) we chose to start with a logo that Calum liked during
our research, and iterate from there.

What followed was a series of logos that started out rather ugly but had
a solid idea behind them; and were then slowly refined. We felt our
resulting logo communicated enough about his work, without straying
towards the extreme sports angle we feared might be a result. By
starting with a very simple idea, and slowly (and carefully) refining
it, only adding what was necessary; we ended up with something that we
feel represents Calum personality perfectly.

Content
-------

Calum was really enthusiastic about the website once he saw the brand
coming together. He began flooding us with photos we could use and
content that could make up the website. It was a refreshing change, as
often website projects suffer from not enough, or irrelevant content.

Often, content is the hardest part of the site to crack. It’s certainly
the most crucial, and without it; all attempts at design fall a little
flat. With Calum supplying so much raw material to work with, we could
be quite ruthless with our editing. We were aiming to concentrate
Calum’s message into a fewer a words as possible, but not so few that
the communication was compromised.

Initially, Calum found our approach to editing his content a little
brutal, and felt we were cutting too much. However, as the content
slowly started coalescing into pages & paragraphs, he saw that
concentrating what he was saying into as few words as possible worked.
What was left had impact, and engaged the reader.

As part of our logo development, we had also created a number of other
vectors. We all agreed that it would be a shame for these not to make
the cut, so they became part of the page layout. They added visual
elements other than photos, which was a point of difference to Calum’s
competition. Their sites were incredibly image heavy, and felt a little
bogged down by them both technically and editorially.

Video
-----

One element however would dwarf the rest of the content. Calum had been
working with his climbing partner, Molly Hughes, and Mark Leary, a video
director; to create a short video to summarise the team, their
personality and the challenge that they faced.

It was clear as soon as the video was mentioned that it would play a
large role in the site’s experience. We knew that the two would have to
compliment each other and work together. If we ended up with a video
that fought with the website around it, the experience could be
confusing and all the good work we had done with Calum in developing his
brand would be compromised.

It was decided that we should have a chat with Mark, and find out his
plans for the video, and his thoughts on the brand that we had
developed. Fortunately, we found ourselves on the same page. When Mark
explained his plan for the video, we couldn’t help but nod our heads the
entire way through!

Bringing it together
--------------------

The video was finished just before the launch of the site, and we got
our first look at it only a day before the site was due to go live.
After our earlier chat with Mark, we knew we had nothing to worry about,
and that the website and the video would work well together; but we had
no idea just how well the two would gel!

What we learned
---------------

### Have fun!

This project was a chance to have some fun. Calum was incredibly relaxed
about the project, and was enjoying his first taste of building a
website. The hardest part of the process was getting feedback from
Calum, as it was hard to get him to be critical of our work.

What was more apparent was the joy we found in tackling something as
different as a portfolio website for an ice-climbing adventurer.

### Don’t let business get in the way!

We found that the site definitely felt more like a personal project than
client work at times. This caused us to stray from the brief on
occasions, and drop many of the fundraising features that were initially
present in the brief. After discussing these omissions with Calum, it
was concluded that we should stick with the site we had built. He liked
that it was his personal space to document his growth as a climber and
the exciting trips he went on; and not a transcription of the various
fundraising pages he was already using. It was different, and by having
that ‘portfolio’ to refer to, it made his fundraising pages stronger.

### Let things develop naturally.

Throwing ourselves into brand design was a challenge. It was not
entirely new territory for the team, but certainly ground that they
weren’t as familiar with. However, by taking the same iterative process
that we use for our web development, we think we cracked it.

We always had an end in mind, but we let the route to that aesthetic
goal develop slowly. This careful approach posed many more questions
than we had anticipated, and brought to light some interesting ideas
that we had not considered previously. Take your time, and the result
will be evidence of that care and attention.

