+++
date = "2015-04-22T15:07:16+01:00"
title = "Persian Pursuits"
image = "/images/persianpursuitslogo.png"
subheader = "A startup that wants to shakeup adventure travel"
originurl = "http://www.persianpursuits.co.uk"
sitelink = "www.persianpursuits.co.uk"

+++

Travel is rightly considered to be one of the most educational and
liberating experiences a person can pursue. It’s hard to compete with
exploring a new, unfamiliar place and the excitement that brings;
particularly when that travel takes you away from the hotel complexes
and far off the beaten track.

Charity challenges and the publicity surrounding them such as the Sport
Relief climb of Kilimanjaro a few years ago and more recently Alex
Jones’ ascent Moonlight Buttress in Yosemite National Park, have
prompted companies offering treks to far flung places to up their game.
There is now huge competition in the marketplace, and everyone has been
forced to come up with new, exotic and sometimes weirdly themed treks
and adventures for the traveller with wanton wanderlust.

The team at TC are very familiar with these adventures, having taken
part in a few for charity, and possessing the same insatiable urge to
travel. When we were approached by Shirin Shabestari to help build the
website for her new idea, Persian Pursuits; we were instantly intrigued.

As an Iranian woman now living in the UK, she wanted to promote Iran and
it’s wonderful mountains as a destination for the adventurous traveller.
Rather than compete with the much larger trekking companies and their
machine gun approach to adventure, she wanted to offer a more restrained
and personal experience of her country. She wanted people to experience
and understand Iran the way she did, and balance the often negative
media coverage from Western countries.

She wanted her fledgling business to offer small, personal trips to Iran
for people to experience it’s mountains, Damavand in particular; and
show off the wonderful culture to be found in the capital, Tehran.

A Blank Canvas
--------------

Having worked for Action Challenge, a company offering charity treks and
challenges; Jamie was extremely familiar with the concept, and what the
counter movement that Shirin was proposing meant. However, his work
building websites at Action Challenge was going to be far removed from
the blank slate that Persian Pursuits offered. He was used to building
sites with very tight restrictions, & with CMSs that were already very
well established and mature.

Once again, the prospect of creating something new and different got us
really excited about the project’s potential. It was a chance to promote
a beautiful country that had yet to be spoilt by large amounts of
tourism, and offer the chance to experience it in a genuine and
sustainable way. This was so in-keeping with Jamie’s views on travel,
that he couldn’t wait to get started!

We knew that successfully creating a site that did Persian Pursuits
justice would require us to focus on the specific needs of the business,
rather than what has already been done before.

Different needs
---------------

The site would require all the standard trappings of a travel business.
There would need to be a way to easily add information about upcoming
trips, and easily organise them. The trip listings would need to be
standardised in a template to ensure that there was consistency between
listings, and to assist the clarity of communication. This was nothing
out of the ordinary.

However, unlike many well known trekking destinations, Iran is quite
unfamiliar to most people. They know very little about it generally, and
even less about what’s required to travel there. Shirin also informed us
that the process of obtaining a visa to travel is complex, and subject
to illogical and unexplained change at short notice. This can be
off-putting to many potential visitors.

It was clear that there was room to establish a good knowledge base of
information about traveling to Iran to support Persian Pursuits’ treks,
and provide reassurance to those unsure about making it their
destination of choice.

We also decided quite early on that a blog documenting past trips would
be a very useful tool. It would allow the knowledge base to remain 100%
factual and quite dry, with more anecdotal advice being published in the
blog. It would also act as key selling point when potential customers
were browsing the site if there were detailed write-ups of past trips to
compliment the information about upcoming ones. Most importantly, it
would allow Shirin to develop Persian Pursuits as an authority on the
subject of traveling to Iran; something the young business would benefit
from hugely should the established travel companies make a move into
Iran.

Old v New
---------

When working at Action Challenge, these sorts of sites had always been
supported by a heavily modified Wordpress installation with lots of
plugins, or a completely bespoke CMS. We wanted to explore whether we
could build something to offer the same functionality with our new CMS
of choice, Statamic. For those who don’t know Statamic, is a flat-file
CMS; meaning that it doesn’t require a database. This makes it a much
simpler system to work with, both in the development stages, but also
further down the line when changes, or ammendments to content is
required. However, it doesn’t allow for the complex arranging and
filtering of information that a database does.

We knew Statamic was more than capable of the project, but we had yet to
build anything of this nature with it. Previously, we had reserved it
for smaller publishing or blogging websites, but had been impressed by
it’s capabilities. It was time to see what Statamic could do!

Focus on templates…build from there
-----------------------------------

It was clear that this website would need to sustain the company through
it’s early years, and once it was online; would receive very little
attention. Shirin was a busy woman, and just running the trips was a
full-time job in itself. Promoting the business as well would leave her
extremely pushed for time. We needed to ensure that the site wouldn’t
slow her down, and make adding and editing content a breeze.

We aimed to make it as modular as possible so that it scaled easily,
both horizontally and vertically; and ensure that once it was released
it was ‘right’. Whilst we usually advocate a process of slow, constant
refinement; it was clear that this wasn’t the correct approach for
Persian Pursuits. Once it was live, that was it!

Stumbling block - future proof
------------------------------

Our desire to make it future proof meant that we focussed heavily on
building templates that were relevant to the future of the company, as
well as their current needs. Just because Persian Pursuits current trips
ran once a year, we wanted to ensure that multiple dates could be added.
We examined not only the content that Shirin might need to publish now,
but the content she would need to publish in the years to come. This was
quite a difficult process, as not only were we speculating the future
needs of the business, we were doing so with almost zero legacy
information to base our decisions on. With hindsight, this was a
mistake, as both the team and Shirin became sidetracked by the
‘possible’, rather than the ‘actual’ needs of the business; and
generating strong, engaging content and experiences got sidelined.

This is something that became a problem at Action Challenge too. It
might be the nature of the travel industry that it’s requirements of a
website are very focussed on the future. Whether it’s an inherent trait
or not, we recognised that we had become victim of the dreaded
“paralysis by over-analysis”. This had entirely derailed projects at
Action Challenge, where no one had the experience to stop them, analyse
the situation and put a plan of action in place to resolve it.

At this point, we hadn’t produced a great deal of code, and all of the
concepts were static mockups made in Photoshop and Sketch. We decided
that the solution to this situation was revert to the iterative process
we usually use, and in a moment of madness had abandoned for this
project.

Design in code
--------------

We immediately transcribed our latest mockup into code, and worked from
there. This initial prototype was certainly far from perfect and barely
functional in places. Many problems with the user-interface became
apparent as soon as we started working with dynamic prototypes, and we
realised that we had made some of the templates too constrained.

Whilst areas of the site such as the trip listings benefitted from the
highly structured templates we had made; others such as the knowledge
base didn’t. As we were uncertain about the nature of the content, we
had struggled to build these templates without resorting to guesswork.
The result was a set of templates for the knowledge base that were
highly opinionated, yet didn’t match the actual content we wanted
published for launch. The answer was to scrap our highly opinionated
templates for this area of the site, and move forward with a far more
open and generic method of inputing content that would allow greater
flexibility. Perhaps, once the knowledge base was more established, less
generic templates would be of benefit, but for the time being; they
proved to be ideal solution.

Our codebase became highly modular, and built outwards from the core
functionality of the site. New features either extended or modified
pre-existing styles. This was a process we had used when developing
previous sites with very little data to support decisions.

Instantly, the site became more cohesive with a better sense of
identity. This is the advantage of designing in the browser with code,
everything becomes bound together, so you lose disparate elements that
fight with each other.

Even when we coded features that were later rejected, the code that was
written for these features usually became of use elsewhere. Unlike
design that is highly specific, code (when written well) can be
extremely modular and recycled for use outside it’s original intent.

This intervention and the return to our preferred process took a
floundering project that was falling behind schedule, and gave it
direction which got it back on track.

Results
-------

Whilst the purpose of the site was always to act as a resource of
information for Persian Pursuits’ trips to Iran, and get people booked
on to trips; it actually accomplished much more as the public face of
the company. Shirin had previously had great success using just Facebook
to represent her company, but it always lacked a sense of authority, and
lots of interest in trips would fizzle out. By creating a focal point
for her thriving Facebook page to direct leads to, she gave Persian
Pursuits far more credibility and a louder voice with with to promote
travel to Iran.

It’s also been very successful as a tool to promote Shirin and the work
that she does. The site, along with the monumental persistence, gave her
a credibility that allowed her to be chosen as a speaker for the Royal
Geographical Society, and receive sponsorship and support from a number
of outdoor equipment manufacturers. Even more impressively, she has a
video in the pipeline in conjunction with Hot Aches productions taking
place on her upcoming ‘Damavand Winter’ trip in April.

What We Learnt
--------------

### Real code is what counts

Designing mockups is always great fun. You have a suite of tools readily
at your disposal that help you create designs quickly and easily, and
don’t hinder the flow of your ideas. Code slows down this process, and
makes it less natural; which is why it’s tempting to do as much design
as possible before hitting the code editor.

The issue is that sometime problems with the design don’t surface until
you get code into the browser. You can end up redesigning a lot of
features that have previously been signed off as ‘done’. Not only is it
demoralising, it’s a waste of time.

Unless we find a clear reason against it, we will continue getting our
work into code as quickly as possible. Ideally we would like to get to a
stage where not only the final few elements are added whilst coding, but
the vast majority of the site makes it’s debut in code.

### Start small

This project grew quickly. It actually overtook us, and started to run
away a little. It was very easy, and tempting, to focus on what the site
‘could’ do; rather than what it ‘should’. It’s a subtle change in
thinking, but one that caused the project to become derailed. Only by
coming back to what mattered right in the here & now did we wrest it
under control again.

### Be bold, rectify mistakes later

“Paralysis by over-analysis” is real. Jamie thought when he was at
Action Challenge that it occurred due to the strung out nature of an
inexperienced in-house team trying to collaborate with a design agency
based hundreds of miles away. As it turns out, it can strike in much
smaller teams, and is just as dangerous to a project.

We previously worked in ways that avoided this paralysis by making
decisions, putting them in code and testing them out as fast as
possible. We aimed to fail as fast as possible to rule out what didn’t
work, and to prove what did. By avoiding this iteration and trying to
get it ‘right’ first time whilst in the design stage, we just stopped
making progress; instead going around and around in circles.

### PS: These write-ups matter

Writing up our case studies can sometime take a few hours by the time
it’s been reviewed, edited and uploaded. It would be far easier to just
add a few photos of our work to our portfolio with a quick paragraph
explaining what we did.

However, we’ve found that these longer, more insightful case studies
help us refine and develop our process. They highlight what parts were
successful and should be incorporated into our next project, and which
parts caused any issues we encountered. We got this project back on
track when we revisited Jake Morrell’s project and had to amend our
writeup. What we found in that writeup informed our choices in this
project, and allowed us to identify the steps we needed to take to get
it back on course.

Writing this particular case study has highlighted more failures than
successes in our process, but it had also allowed us to learn from them.
Sometimes to only way to improve is to pick yourself back up, and work
out why you fell over in the first place.

