content/post/fizzle-talk.md, before:

---
author: "Jamie"
date: "2015-06-25T08:00:00+01:00"
heroImgDescription: ""
heroimage: ""
image: ""
subheader: Cutting through noise to deliver web-building signal
summary: I gave a talk for a group of business owners about building their first website.
  I wrote an article based on that talk for their, and everyone else's reference.
title: London Fizzle Meetup - June 2015
topimage: ""
---

## A Brilliant Evening!

First of all, I'd like to send a big **'Thank You!'** to Chris, Rob & Heena who did a wonderful job organising a brilliant event.

The online [Fizzle](http://fizzle.co/?aid=8451) community is a wonderful resource, full of amazing people doing amazing things; but it really comes to life when you meet these people in person. It was a great honour to be asked to speak in front of them, and share my knowledge of building websites.

Building a website is the cornerstone for any online entrepreneur, and it's relevance is becoming greater as time passes. However, there's a lot of information out there, which can make the process utterly confusing to the uninitiated. The problem isn't the volume of information though, it's the 'noise' within. There's a lot of good advice (signal) and a lot of terrible or irrelevant advice (noise), and separating them can be tricky.

My talk aimed to cut through the noise and deliver a small dose of signal to get everyone started. I decided to write my talk up to serve as a point of reference to everyone there. It has the same content as my talk, plus a bit more. I've included more advice, along with links to what I feel are the most relevant, and important articles out there for anyone building a website.

The site can be found here: [On the Creation of Websites](http://fizzle-london.netlify.com)

## My line in the sand

As you may have read in my casestudies, I've moved away from Content Management Systems like Wordpress for my client work, and have other systems (namely static solutions) that I feel are more suitable. I brought this up during my talk, as *not* talking about technology and platforms was going to tough to avoid. When Wordpress came up, and I spoke about how I don't feel it's the most practical option anymore, I received a healthy dose of skepticism from some of the guys there who use Wordpress themselves. I completely expected that, but the insights that came from the resulting debate were interesting.

I haven't actually sat down and had this discussion with *other developers* before, so it was nice to get into a bit of a debate about the pro's and con's of each option. We know how fervently a developer can defend their platform/language/text editor of choice. We're almost fanatical about our beliefs. Having to justify why I've abandoned an industry standard like Wordpress and shy away from the heavy-handed contracts that most designers/developers use was a really healthy thing for me to do.


I think it's clear that I've drawn my line in the sand, and I offer *what I truly believe* to be the best service I can for my clients. That's required me to approach problems differently and look beyond the obvious solutions. This goes against the grain, and I'm comfortable with that, because I believe in what I'm offering.

Commit message:

More tidying of front matter and meta data

content/post/fizzle-talk.md, after:

---
date: "2015-06-25T08:00:00+01:00"
title: "London Fizzle Meetup - June 2015"
subheader: "Cutting through noise to deliver web-building signal"
description: "Recently, I gave a talk for a group of business owners about building their first website. To help attendees and those that couldn't make it, there's now a one-page site with all of that information...plus a bit more!"
author: "Jamie"
images: ""
videos: ""
news_keywords: ""

heroimage: ""
herobackground: ""
heroimgdescription: ""
---

## A Brilliant Evening!

First of all, I'd like to send a big **'Thank You!'** to Chris, Rob & Heena who did a wonderful job organising a brilliant event.

The online [Fizzle](http://fizzle.co/?aid=8451) community is a wonderful resource, full of amazing people doing amazing things; but it really comes to life when you meet these people in person. It was a great honour to be asked to speak in front of them, and share my knowledge of building websites.

Building a website is the cornerstone for any online entrepreneur, and it's relevance is becoming greater as time passes. However, there's a lot of information out there, which can make the process utterly confusing to the uninitiated. The problem isn't the volume of information though, it's the 'noise' within. There's a lot of good advice (signal) and a lot of terrible or irrelevant advice (noise), and separating them can be tricky.

My talk aimed to cut through the noise and deliver a small dose of signal to get everyone started. I decided to write my talk up to serve as a point of reference to everyone there. It has the same content as my talk, plus a bit more. I've included more advice, along with links to what I feel are the most relevant, and important articles out there for anyone building a website.

The site can be found here: [On the Creation of Websites](http://fizzle-london.netlify.com)

## My line in the sand

As you may have read in my casestudies, I've moved away from Content Management Systems like Wordpress for my client work, and have other systems (namely static solutions) that I feel are more suitable. I brought this up during my talk, as *not* talking about technology and platforms was going to tough to avoid. When Wordpress came up, and I spoke about how I don't feel it's the most practical option anymore, I received a healthy dose of skepticism from some of the guys there who use Wordpress themselves. I completely expected that, but the insights that came from the resulting debate were interesting.

I haven't actually sat down and had this discussion with *other developers* before, so it was nice to get into a bit of a debate about the pro's and con's of each option. We know how fervently a developer can defend their platform/language/text editor of choice. We're almost fanatical about our beliefs. Having to justify why I've abandoned an industry standard like Wordpress and shy away from the heavy-handed contracts that most designers/developers use was a really healthy thing for me to do.


I think it's clear that I've drawn my line in the sand, and I offer *what I truly believe* to be the best service I can for my clients. That's required me to approach problems differently and look beyond the obvious solutions. This goes against the grain, and I'm comfortable with that, because I believe in what I'm offering.
